---
bibliography:
- 'library.bib'
---

\

[cc]{} &

A neat way to build free-form architecture
==========================================

[@Barnes1975] @Barnes1975 [@Bouhaya2009] @Bouhaya2009 [@ALCIMED2012]

Building free-forms
-------------------

### Non-standard forms

### Importance of free-forms in modern architecture

### Canonical approaches to build free-forms

### Main challenges

Gridshell structure : definition and classification
---------------------------------------------------

### Historic overview

### Rigid gridshell

### Elastic gridshell

The invention of the gridshell concept is commonly attributed to Frei
Otto, a German architect who devoted several years to gridshells. In
1975 he achieved the famous *Mannheim Multihalle* [@Happold1975], a
wooden shell of 7500 m^2^, in collaboration with the engineer Edmund
Happold (Arup). Literally, the word refers to grids behaving like
shells : from a mechanical point of view that means stresses acting on
the structure are mainly transmitted through compression and traction.
These structures can cross large-span with very little material.

However, according to the historic evolution of the concept,
characterizing a gridshell as the combination of a structural concept –
a grid behaving like a shell – and a specific construction process –
using the bending flexibility of the material – seems to be more
accurate. The Mannheim project (in which a wooden regular and planar
grid, lacking shear stiffness, is elastically deformed up to a targeted
shape with the help of stays, and then braced and covered) is regarded
as the starting point of this new concept.

The Mannheim project is regarded as the starting point of this new
concept for which a wooden regular and planar grid, lacking shear
stiffness, is elastically deformed up to a targeted shape with the help
of stays, and then braced and covered. This type of gridshell, known as
elastic gridshell, offers a very elegant manner to materialize freeform
shapes from an initially flat and regular grid, which obviously has many
practical benefits: planar geometry, standard connection nodes, standard
profiles and so on.

\

\
\

Elastic gridshells : revisiting Mannheim
----------------------------------------

Elastic gridshells : the benefits of composite materials
--------------------------------------------------------

Glass fiber reinforced polymer (GFRP) tubes are at the heart of the
presented technology. They can favorably replace wood where both
resistance and bending ability of the material is sought [@Douthe2010].

The tubes are made by pultrusion, “a continuous molding process whereby
reinforcing fibers are saturated with a liquid polymer resin and then
carefully formed and pulled through a heated die to form a part.
Pultrusion results in straight constant cross section parts of virtually
any shippable length”.[^1] This process is very economic and its
standardization guarantees very stable material and mechanical
properties. It frees designers from the problem of joining wood pieces
with finger joints to obtain long and continuous members and of wood
durability.

\

Gridshells
----------

### Recent projects

In 2000, Shigeru Ban innovated by shifting from wooden materials to
cardboard for the construction of the Japan Pavilion at the Hanover Expo
[@McQuaid2006]. More recently, with the development of numerical tools,
two new projects were carried out: the wooden gridshells of Downland in
2002 (Weald and Downland Gridshell, Chichester, UK) [@Harris2003] and
Savill in 2006 (Savill Garden Gridshell, Wick Ln, UK) [@Harris2008]. The
principles of these projects are similar to that of Mannheim; however,
new construction methods were used for the newer gridshells.

The first research works on elastic gridshells are attributed to Frei
Otto, founder of the *Institute for Lightweight Structures* (IL,
Stuttgart, Germany). Probably one of his first elastic gridshell was
built in 1962 with students at Berkley, USA, and was made with steel
rods and not wooden elements. During the 60’s, he built several
experimental structures including one at Essen in 1962 and two at
Montreal in 1967 [@Liddell2015]. In 1975 he completed the famous
Mannheim Multihalle, a wooden shell of , in collaboration with the
engineer Edmund Happold [@Happold1975; @Otto1976]. This project is
generally regarded as the starting point of this new concept.

In 2000, Shigeru Ban innovated by shifting from wooden materials to
cardboard for the construction of the Japan Pavilion at the Hanover Expo
[@McQuaid2006]. More recently, with the development of numerical tools,
new projects were carried out : the wooden gridshells of Downland, UK,
in 2002 [@Harris2003] and Savill, UK, in 2006 [@Harris2008]. The
principles of these projects are similar to that of Mannheim. However,
new construction methods were used for the newer gridshells. The flat
lattice of the Downland gridshell was built on a modular scaffold
platform, which height was altered progressively to deform the lattice.
The grid was braced by a third direction of laths. The lattice of the
Savill gridshell was built on a fixed scaffold platform. Small jacks
where used to deform the lattice, pushing from below. The grid was then
braced with plywood panels, which also served as the first cladding
layer.

The Orangery roof at Chiddingstone Castle is a smaller gridshell built
in 2006. The lattice is very similar to the one employed in Downland.
But this time the grid is braced with a diagonal cable network and the
cladding is made of triangular glass panels (the first of this kind). To
this end, the steel connection includes a cable clamping system and is
equipped with a threaded hole to accept fixing parts for the glazing.

### Recent developments

Based on this groundwork, the Navier laboratory has developed a research
program on gridshells for the last decade, focusing on both the use of
new materials and the development of more efficient numerical methods
[@Douthe2007]. These developments have been validated by the
construction of two prototypes (Figures \[fig:4\]a and \[fig:4\]b) whose
areas were about 150 m^2^.

In 2011, the laboratory used its expert knowledge for a large-scale
project [@Baverel2012], the forum of the Solidays festival (c). This
achievement, built by voluntary workers, has been the first composite
material gridshell to house public.

In 2012, the context is favorable for a new achievement named
*“Temporary Cathedral of Créteil”*. Although this gridshell has an area
very similar to the Solidays one, the project raised new challenges, in
particular the challenge of reliability. Indeed, its period of use is at
least two years. Additionally, the skills coming from T/E/S/S company
made possible important developments such as for doors, lacing edge
beam, anchorages and sleeves.

Unlike the two first prototypes, the gridshells built for Solidays and
at Créteil are based on a new approach regarding shape-structure
relationship. Indeed, thanks to a numerical tool performing the compass
method, the geometry of the object is no longer defined as the reversal
of a hanging net – in this case, only the flat geometry could be
mastered [@Addis2013] – but now the flat geometry is straight deducted
from the one proposed by the architect. This new approach opens up new
architectural horizons, making possible the exploration of new shapes
for gridshells.

The Faraday Pavilion : [@Nicholas2013] The Pishwanton / lothian :
[@Pishwanton2003] The laboratory Navier tested various numerical methods
to generate such grids [@Bouhaya2009] Masson : [@Masson2017].

![Erection of the primary grid by two
cranes[]{data-label="fig:5"}](image6){width="\textwidth"}

  Category     Item                Unit        Quantity 
  ------------ ------------------- --------- ---------- --
  Public       seating             p                360 
               standing            p                500 
  Dimensions   length              m                 29 
               width               m                 17 
               height              m                  7 
               contour             lm                75 
               area                m^2^             350 
               volume              m^3^            1600 
  Gridshell    tubes (x176)        lm              1775 
               connections                         1130 
               sleeves                              125 
               anchorages                           127 
               *ground (single)*                     77 
               *ground (double)*                     16 
               *door (single)*                       18 
               weight              kg/m^2^            5 
  Fabric       opaque              m^2^             530 
               transparent         m^2^              12 
               lacing rod          lm                67 
               weight              kg/m^2^            1 

\[Key numbers\][Key numbers.]{}

### Gridshell in composite material

The benefits of GFRP gridshells have been covered previously. We just
recall the main aspects.

The gridshells built in composite material, being at the heart of this
paper, are consistent with the framework defined previously, that is to
say :

Glass fiber reinforced polymer (GFRP) tubes are at the heart of the
presented technology. They can favorably replace wood where both
resistance and bending ability of the material is sought [@Douthe2010].

The tubes are made by pultrusion, “a continuous molding process whereby
reinforcing fibers are saturated with a liquid polymer resin and then
carefully formed and pulled through a heated die to form a part.
Pultrusion results in straight constant cross section parts of virtually
any shippable length”.[^2] This process is very economic and its
standardization guarantees very stable material and mechanical
properties. It frees designers from the problem of joining wood pieces
with finger joints to obtain long and continuous members and of wood
durability.

#### Structural Typology

Their mechanical behaviour is very similar to the one of real shells
even if the material is discrete and located in a grid more or less
open. In spite of that, gridshells benefit from the same advantages as
the ones showed by an eggshell : they can cross large span using a low
amount of material. Their stiffness is mainly linked to their
double-curved shape.

#### Material Flexibility for Structural Rigidity

In this field of application, composite materials like glass fibre
reinforced polymer (GFRP) could favourably replace wood, where both
resistance and bending ability of the material is sought [@Douthe2010].
The stiffness of the structure does not derive from the intrinsic
material rigidity but principally from its geometric curvature. Ideally,
the composite profiles are produced by pultrusion, an economic
continuous moulded process. The standardization of the process
guaranties very stable material and mechanical properties. It frees
designers from the painful problematic of wood joining and wood
durability. The characterization of this material is presented further
in the paper.

#### Erection Process

Usually, the grid morphology is not trivial and leads to design numerous
costly and complex joints. To overcome this issue, an original and
innovative erection process was developed that takes advantage of the
flexibility inherent to slender elements. A regular planar grid made of
long continuous linear members is built on the ground (a). The elements
are pinned together so the grid has no in-plane shear stiffness and can
accommodate large-scale deformations during erection. Then, the grid is
bent elastically to its final shape (). Finally, the grid is frozen in
the desired shape with a third layer of bracing members (b) and the
structure becomes a shell.

![Erection plan and construction
stages[]{data-label="fig:6"}](image5){width="95.00000%"}

![Erection plan and construction
stages[]{data-label="fig:6"}](image9){width="93.00000%"}

[^1]: Video explaining the pultrusion process :
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4MoHNZB5b_Y>

[^2]: Video explaining the pultrusion process :
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4MoHNZB5b_Y>
